Joint Model Deployment and Task Offloading with Load Balancing for DNN Inference in Vehicular Edge Computing

# Han Cao1, Yalan Wu2(B), Jiaxin Wu1, and Jigang Wu1,2(B)

# Abstract

Existing works have paid little attention to load balancing for deep neural network (DNN) inference by joint model deployment and task offloading in VEC. Thus, this paper focuses on load balancing with full consideration of characteristics for VEC and DNN inference tasks to improve quality of service. An optimization problem is formulated with the objective of minimizing the maximum load of roadside units (RSUs) under the constraints of per task response time, per task inference accuracy, etc. To solve the problem, a two-stage optimization algorithm is proposed. Specifically, for the first stage, a load-aware matching strategy is developed by deploying DNN models and offloading inference tasks. For the second stage, a strategy is designed by offloading DNN inference task between computation units, i.e., CPU and GPU in this paper, in each RSU to further achieve the load balancing in VEC. The simulations are conducted based on three kinds of DNN inference tasks, three different accuracy models for each kind, and four kinds of computation units. Simulations results show that, the proposed algorithm outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in terms of the maximum load in VEC. For example, the proposed algorithm can significantly decrease the maximum load by at least 42.9% for different numbers of RSUs, compared with two state-of-the-art methods.

# Keywords

Vehicular edge computing \cdot DNN inference \cdot Load balancing \cdot Model deployment \cdot Task offloading.

# 1 Introduction

Recently, the rapid development of machine learning technologies has driven the emergence of a wide range of intelligent vehicle applications, such as pedestrian.

This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62202108, Guangdong Natural Science Foundation under Grant Nos. 2024A1515010354, 2023A1515111164, 2023A1515011230, China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant No. 2024M760585.

detection [1], autonomous driving [2], and collision avoidance. These applications rely on well-trained deep neural network (DNN) models to perform inference on real-time input data. The process of inference will consume a lot of computing resources. Although the computing capabilities of modern vehicles have been greatly improved, they still struggle to support a large number of the inference requests. We use the Jetson Xavier NX, a common on-board computing device, as an example. When using the ResNet-152 model to infer a one-second video, the Jetson Xavier NX takes approximately 4.5 seconds [3]. However, this processing time is far from sufficient to meet the real-time demands of inference tasks. As a solution, vehicular edge computing (VEC) has emerged as a promising paradigm, where inference tasks can be offloaded to nearby roadside units (RSUs) with abundant computing resources [4].

Effective model deployment and task offloading strategies can significantly improve quality of service (QoS) for inference tasks [5]. Model deployment refers to deploying well-trained DNN models on RSUs to serve the corresponding inference tasks. When the inference task arrives at the RSU, if the requested model is not available, the corresponding model needs to be deployed. This will introduce additional model deployment delay. Therefore, model deployment directly impacts the QoS of inference tasks [6]. Task offloading refers to scheduling an inference task from one RSU to another with more computing resources to accelerate the execution, thereby improving the QoS for inference tasks [7]. Jointly optimizing model deployment and task offloading can more effectively enhance QoS. In the optimization process, these two decisions are coupled. Specifically, the decision on one directly affects the outcome of the other. Model deployment is influenced by distribution of inference tasks, while task offloading depends on whether the required model is available at the target RSU. Therefore, coordinating both is crucial to improve QoS for inference tasks.

In VEC, load balancing can effectively optimize the utilization of system computing resources and improve system throughput [8]. The computational resources of RSUs are limited. When a large number of inference tasks arrive simultaneously, the computational resources of RSUs are under significant pressure, resulting in a bottleneck of processing capacity. In this case, the lack of an effective load balancing mechanism may make some RSUs overloaded while others remain underutilized. This imbalance not only increases inference task response delay but also degrades the overall system performance [9]. To address this issue, load balancing strategies for DNN inference in VEC are crucial. However, this is challenging due to several factors. First, RSUs often have different computing units (e.g., CPUs and GPUs) with varying processing powers. Second, inference tasks are unpredictable and delay-sensitive. These factors make load balancing for DNN inference in VEC more difficult than in traditional edge computing environments.

In conclusion, joint optimization of model deployment and task offloading can effectively improve the QoS of inference tasks. However, few existing works focus on load balancing for DNN inference in VEC, which results in low resource utilization and poor QoS. For load balancing, existing works focus on general

computing tasks [10], [11]. However, these works ignore the characteristics of inference tasks. This leads to that these works cannot be well applied for the scenario for DNN inference in VEC. Thus, this paper systematically investigates the algorithm for jointly model deployment and task offloading for DNN inference in VEC with considering the characteristics of DNN inference tasks and VEC, to achieve load balancing. The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.

1. We formulate the problem of joint model deployment and task offloading for DNN inference in VEC. The objective is to minimize the maximum load among RSUs in VEC, i.e., achieving load balancing, under constraints of maximum tolerant delay for each inference task, accuracy requirement of each inference task, etc.
2. We propose a two-stage optimization algorithm to solve the formulated problem. For the first stage, a load-aware matching strategy is designed by joint deploying DNN models and offloading tasks among RSUs. For the second stage, a strategy is developed by offloading inference tasks between different computation units, i.e., CPU and GPU, to further achieving load balancing in VEC.
3. We conduct the simulations on the platform with four kinds of computation units, three kinds of DNN inference tasks, three kinds of DNN models with different accuracy for each kind of tasks. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm significantly performs better than the state-of-the-art methods, in terms of the maximum load in VEC.

# 2 Related Works

# 2.1 Load Balancing

In recent years, load balancing in VEC and mobile edge computing (MEC) environments has been extensively studied, as it can significantly improve resource utilization, enhance system throughput, and reduce task execution latency. These works can be broadly classified into two categories based on the type of tasks: one focuses on load balancing for general computing tasks, while the other addresses load balancing for DNN inference tasks.

For general computing tasks, the optimization goal is to achieve efficient load balancing by minimizing latency, improving resource utilization, and reducing energy consumption. Duan et al. propose a mobility-aware task offloading scheme using LSTM and D3QN, which achieves lower computation costs and improved load balancing in small-cell MEC systems. [12]. Mirza et al. propose the MCLA scheme for task offloading in VEC networks, optimizing efficiency through dynamic switching between 5G-NR-V2X and mmWave, with load balancing and collaboration among vehicles and RSUs [13]. Sun et al. propose a BARGAIN-MATCH algorithm for task offloading and resource allocation in VEC networks, optimizing intra-server and inter-server load balancing through horizontal and vertical collaboration [14]. Huang et al. propose a joint optimization method

to minimize latency and energy consumption while maintaining load balancing in MEC federations by optimizing computation offloading, task migration, and resource allocation [15].

For DNN inference tasks, existing works are mostly multi-objective optimization. Xu et al. propose DAMA, a distributed algorithm for DNN inference offloading in edge networks with load balancing, optimizing inference time and fairness while outperforming existing methods [16]. Hou et al. propose Dys-tri, a dynamic inference framework for distributed edge infrastructure, enabling adaptive per-request DNN processing with low latency and high accuracy, outperforming existing methods [17].

# 2.2 Model Deployment and Task Offloading for DNN Inference

Efficient model deployment and task offloading are crucial for enhancing the performance of DNN inference tasks. For general service, some existing studies focus on joint service placement and task offloading [18-20], but these works do not consider the characteristics of DNN inference tasks, so these studies cannot be well applied to DNN reasoning task scenarios. There have been a number of works that have investigated model deployment and task offloading for DNN inference tasks. These studies can be divided into two main categories: one is that inference tasks can only be served by one inference model, the other is that inference tasks can be served by different inference models.

For the first category, existing studies focus on model partition to improve the QoS of inference tasks by deploying the partitioned models on different devices. A joint DNN partitioning and task offloading scheme is proposed to minimize latency and energy consumption by optimizing partition points and task allocation for multiple devices and edge servers [21]. A framework named MT-A3C is proposed to optimize fine-grained DNN partitioning in mobile edge computing, minimizing inference latency under delay constraints [22]. A method leveraging enhanced particle swarm optimization and adaptive partitioning is proposed to jointly optimize device placement and model partitioning for throughput maximization in heterogeneous edge computing [23].

For the second category, existing studies focus on model selection, model deployment and task offloading. Wang et al. propose a DRL-based approach for dynamic DNN model selection and inference offloading in edge-cloud video analytics, and they investigate its impact on system capacity, inference delay, and overall performance through real-world testbed experiments [24]. Zhao et al. propose the online optimization framework for scalable edge DNN inference to jointly optimize application configuration, model selection, and resource provisioning while balancing accuracy, latency, and cost. [25]. Xu et al. propose the constrained deep reinforcement learning-based task allocation and resource management algorithm to minimize inference delay and ensure accuracy guarantees in UAV-assisted IoT networks [26].

# 3 System Model

We consider a vehicular network consisting of multiple vehicles, RSUs, and a central cloud, as shown in Fig. 1. Each vehicle can offload its inference tasks to the corresponding RSU through vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communications. Meanwhile, RSUs can communicate with each other via wired connection, enabling inference tasks to be offloaded from one RSU to another, thereby facilitating the sharing of computational resources between RSUs. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the RSU in the middle lacks the required model, while the RSU on the right has a model that meets the accuracy requirements of the inference task, prompting the task to be offloaded to the right RSU. We assume that the cloud has stored all well-trained inference models, and RSUs are able to obtain these models from the cloud via wired connections. For example, as shown in Fig. 1, the RSU on the left side of the figure receives a high accuracy DNN inference task request. Since it hasn’t deployed a model that meets the accuracy requirements, it needs to fetch the corresponding model from the cloud. However, due to the real-time requirement of DNN inference tasks for vehicles, we assume that inference tasks can only be processed on RSUs.

# 3.1 Details for RSUs and Vehicles

Let R = {r | r = 1, 2, \cdot \cdot \cdot , R} denote the set of RSUs. The RSUs are heterogeneous in their storage capacity, computational resources, cached models, and so on. We assume that each RSU is equipped with a CPU. However, only a subset

of RSUs are equipped with a GPU due to resource constraints and operational cost considerations. For a given RSU r, we define gr \in {0, 1} to indicate whether it is equipped with a GPU, while gr = 1 represents that RSU r is equipped with a GPU. Furthermore, the storage resource of RSU r is denoted as smaxr, we use rcpu and frgpu to represent the available computation resources of its CPU and GPU, respectively. Each RSU has a task queue, where tasks are processed in a first-in-first-out (FIFO) manner.

Let V = {v | v = 1, 2, \cdot \cdot \cdot , V } denote the set of vehicles. The vehicle generates a number of inference tasks (e.g., path planning, pedestrian detection, traffic light detection, etc.). Since the limited computational resources, vehicles cannot process inference tasks locally. Instead, they offload these tasks to RSUs within their communication range for execution.

# 3.2 Details for DNN Inference

It is important to note that RSUs must have the corresponding DNN models to execute inference tasks. We use M = {m | m = 1, 2, \cdot \cdot \cdot , M} to denote the set of all types of DNN models, with each inference request corresponding to one of these models for execution. We consider each DNN model to have three versions with different levels of inference accuracy (low, medium, and high). Let P = {p | p = 1, 2, 3} indicate three accuracy levels, where the elements of the set correspond to low, medium, and high inference accuracy, respectively. Then, we use \pi_{mp} to represent the mth model with accuracy level p.

For a particular inference request, there is a trade-off between response delay and inference accuracy for using different models to serve this request. To achieve lower inference latency may sacrifice the corresponding inference accuracy. Thus, choosing the best inference model is a major challenge. Due to the resource constraints of RSUs, we assume that for each type of model, an RSU can deploy at most one accuracy level model of that model type. The workload required for inference by the model \pi_{mp} is denoted as wcpu for the CPU and wgpu for the GPU, the storage space required to store the model is cmp, where m \in M and p \in P. Without loss of generality, higher inference accuracy models require more storage space and longer inference times.

Based on the above premises, we define the integer DNN model caching variable as xmpr \in {0, 1} (r \in R, m \in M, p \in P). Specifically, xmpr can be defined as,

1, if model \pi_{mp} is deployed on RSU r,

Let X = {xmpr | r \in R, m \in M, p \in P}. This records all deployment decisions for DNN models.

We use A = {Aj | j \in R} to represent all inference requests received by the RSUs in the system, where Aj denotes the set of all requests received by RSU j. Let Aj = {ajk | j \in R, k \in Nj}, where ajk is an inference request received by RSU j. Here, Nj = {k | k = 1, 2, \cdot \cdot \cdot , nj}, and nj denote the total

# 3.3 Storage Capacity

If an inference task is offloaded to RSU r, it will occupy storage space of RSU for execution. The deployment of DNN models requires a portion of the storage capacity, the occupied storage capacity sdr is calculated as,

sdr = \sum_{m=1}3 \sum_{p=1}X xmprcmp.

Additionally, let sir denote the input data for the inference tasks also take up storage capacity, which can be calculated as,

sir = \sum_{j=1}N \sum_{k=1}nj yjkrdjk.

# 3.4 Communication Delay and Computation Delay

Let sr represent the total occupied storage capacity of RSU r. Then, sr can be calculated as,

sr = sdr + sir.

An inference request can be processed by different RSUs with varying accuracy level models. For example, a request with a medium accuracy requirement can be processed by the corresponding medium or high accuracy models. Thus we define a binary indicator \theta_{mp} to represent whether the task ajk is processed by model \pi_{mp}. Specifically, \theta_{mp} = 1 indicates that the task is processed by the model and vice versa.

The RSU is able to communicate with each other through a wired connection, so that inference tasks can be offloaded from one RSU to others. This means that the RSU to which an inference task is initially submitted may not be the same as the RSU where the task is ultimately offloaded for execution. Thus, transmission delay is introduced only when the task is offloaded to a different RSU. Let Ttrans denote the transmission delay for offloading the inference task ajk from original RSU ojk to RSU r. When task ajk is scheduled to RSU r (i.e., yjkr = 1), the Ttrans can be expressed as follows:

Ttrans =

\frac{djk}{Brsu},     if ojk = r,

0,         otherwise,

where Brsu is the transmission rate between RSUs.

Let Tproc denote the computation delay for processing inference task ajk. When task ajk is scheduled to RSU r (i.e., yjkr = 1), Tproc is defined by,

Tproc =

(\theta_{mp} \cdot wgpu)/fgpu,     if zjk = 1,

(\theta_{jk} \cdot wcpu)/fcpu,     otherwise,

We define a binary indicator hmpr to represent whether RSU r has already cached the model. Specifically, hmpr = 1 denotes that RSU r has cached the mth model with accuracy level p and vice versa. Let Tdown denote the communication delay for RSU r to download the mth model with accuracy level p from the cloud. Thus, Tdown is defined by,

Tdown =

\frac{cmp}{Bcloud},     if xmpr = 1 and hmpr = 0,

0,         otherwise,

where Bcloud is the transmission rate between the cloud and RSU.

We use empr to indicate whether the mth model with accuracy level p is loaded on the GPU of RSU r. Here, if RSU r has loaded the model from CPU to GPU, empr = 1, otherwise, empr = 0. When using a GPU for inference, there is

a model loading delay. Let Tload be the loading delay for using GPU to process the inference task ajk, and it is defined as follows,

Tload = \theta_{mp} \cdot tload, if z0,jk = 0

Tload = \theta_{mp} \cdot jk \cdot jkr \cdot 1empr, otherwise, (10)

where tload represents the loading time of the \pi_{mp}.

Let Tjk denote the response delay of the inference task ajk. The response delay is defined as the time interval from the submission of the task request to the original RSU to the completion of the task. Thus, the response delay is defined as follows,

Tjk = Ttrans + Tdown \cdot \theta_{mp} + Tload + Tproc + Tqueue, (11)

where Tqueue represents the delay to wait for processing at the task queue on RSUs.

# 3.5 Load Balancing of RSUs

In urban scenarios, vehicles in busy blocks are likely to generate a large number of inference requests, while suburban areas tend to have fewer inference requests due to fewer vehicles passing by. This leads to an imbalance in the load distribution, with some RSUs becoming overloaded, while others have a significant amount of idle resources. Hence, assigning a balancing workload to each RSU is very important to address the issues mentioned above. The workload of each RSU can be expressed as follows. We define Lr as the workload of RSU r, which is equal to the delay to complete all inference tasks scheduled on this RSU. Thus, Lr can be calculated as,

Lr = \sum_{j}\inmax yjkr \cdot Tjk. (12)

# 4 Problem Formulation

In order to provide better quality of service for inference requests and improve the resource utilization of RSU, we aim to minimize the RSU with the maximum load. To address the aforementioned issues, it is necessary to make optimal decisions on task offloading, model deployment, and the selection of devices (GPU or CPU) for executing inference tasks. Formally, the optimization problem P is formulated as:

10 H. Cao et al.

(P) : min   max       L                                               (13)

- X,Y,Z   r\inR            r
- R Xnj          X

s.t.

- X              R yjkr = 1                                 (14)
- X3         xmpr \leq 1,   \forallm \in M, r \in R                      (15)
- yjkr \cdot \theta_{mp} \leq xjk          ,    \forallj \in R, k \in N (16)
- zjk \cdot yjkr \leq gr,        \forallj \in R, k \in Nj                    (17)
- yjkr \cdot \theta_{mp} \cdot xjk          p \geq lmin (18)
- sr \leq smaxr     , \forallr \in R                                   (19)
- Tjk \leq \tau_{max},      \forallj \in R, k \in N                           (20)
- xmpr \in {0, 1},         \forallm \in M, p \in P, r \in R               (21)
- yjkr \in {0, 1},    \forallj, r \in R, k \in Nj                       (22)
- zjk \in {0, 1},     \forallj \in R, k \in Nj                          (23)

Constraint (14) ensures that each inference task can be offloaded to only one RSU. Constraint (15) ensures that each RSU has at most one accuracy level of a certain type of model. Constraint (16) ensures that each inference task can only be routed to the RSU which possesses the corresponding DNN model. Constraint (17) ensures that a GPU is used for inference tasks only if the target RSU is equipped with a GPU. Constraint (18) ensures that the accuracy level of the model on the target RSU satisfies the accuracy requirements of the task. Constraint (19) ensures that the storage capacity required for processing inference tasks on each RSU does not exceed its available storage capacity. Constraint (20) ensures that each inference task is completed within the maximal tolerant response delay.

# 5   Proposed Algorithm

To address problem P, we first design a load-aware matching algorithm, denoted as LAMA, that is proposed to determine model deployment and task offloading strategy. Then, we propose a GPU-accelerated task processing algorithm, denoted as GAP, to schedule tasks onto GPUs in order to accelerate task execution. We combine both algorithms into a unified optimization framework, called LAMA-GAP, to effectively tackle problem P.

# 5.1 Load-Aware Matching Algorithm

To determine the model deployment and task offloading strategy, we formulate this process as a matching game. The matching game is a mathematical

# Load Balancing for DNN Inference in VEC

framework that models the matching process between two sets of entities with individual preferences. It is widely used in resource allocation and network optimization. The definition of the matching game is as follows.

Let I denote the set of tasks and R represent the set of RSUs. The matching game defined over (I, R) has two preference relations ≻a and ≻r that allow each player to indicate preference over all players in the opposite set. The matching relationship \mu reflects the scheduling of tasks on RSUs for execution, representing the association between tasks and RSUs. Formally, \mu is defined as a matching function I \cup R \rightarrow 2I\cupR, satisfying the following requirements:

- \mu(ajk) \subseteq R and |\mu(ajk)| = 1
- \mu(r) \subseteq I and |\mu(r)| = \sum_{j=1}P \sum_{k=1}n yjkr, s.t. (16)-(20) jk \in \mu(r) \Leftarrow\Rightarrow r \in \mu(ajk)

A blocking pair (ajk, r) exists if both task ajk and RSU r prefer each other over their current matches, and this will make the matching unstable.

A matching relation \mu is stable if there are no blocking pairs and all tasks are scheduled to RSUs.

In the matching process, each player ranks all other players in the opposite set according to their own preferences, thus creating a preference list. The items ranked higher in the list indicate a closer match to the player’s needs.

For inference tasks, each task has a specific deadline and tends to be executed on the RSU that minimizes its response delay, thereby ensuring that the task is completed. The task preference list is defined as:

r ≻ajk r^{\prime} \Leftarrow\Rightarrow Tjk(yjkr = 1) &#x3C; Tjk(yjkr^{\prime} = 1).

For RSUs, they aim to execute tasks that result in the minimal increase in their load, ensuring their computational resources are fully utilized without becoming idle, while preventing the load from becoming too high to affect the execution of subsequent tasks. The preference list of RSU is defined as:

ajk ≻r amn \Leftarrow\Rightarrow ∆Lr(yjkr = 1) &#x3C; ∆Lr(ymnr = 1),

where ∆Lr(yjkr = 1) denotes the load increment of task ajk when scheduled on RSU r, similarly for ∆Lr(ymnr = 1).

Unlike traditional matching algorithms, LAMA incorporates the system load as a key factor, ensuring that tasks are matched to RSUs in a way that promotes load balancing across the system, thereby deriving model deployment and task offloading strategies. The detailed procedure of LAMA is described in algorithm 1. Specifically, LAMA works as follows.

1. Initialize the set of unmatched tasks and the maximum load of the system, then sort tasks by deadline (line 2).
2. Construct preference lists for all unmatched tasks and RSUs. Each task selects its most preferred RSU (line 4 to line 9).

# 5.1 Load-Aware Matching Algorithm

Step 3. If an RSU has the highest load and not all unmatched tasks prefer it, skip it and continue matching with other RSUs (line 10 to line 13).

Step 4. The current RSU selects its most preferred task from proposals and checks if it meets the execution requirements. If met, schedule the task on it. Otherwise, reject the task and all less preferred tasks (line 14 to line 26).

Step 5. Repeat steps 2 to 4, until all tasks are matched.

Algorithm 1: LAMA: Load-Aware Matching Algorithm
Require: Set I of all inference requests and set R of RSUs
Ensure: A stable matching \mu between R and I to get models deployment and task offloading strategy
1: Initialize I^{\prime} := I, Lcur := 0;
2: Sort tasks by increasing maximum tolerated delay;
3:  while I^{\prime} = \emptyset do
4:   for r \in R and ajk \in I^{\prime} do
5:    Build preference lists: Pₐ jk and Pᵣ ;
7:   for ajk \in I^{\prime} do
8:    Task ajk proposes to its most preferred RSU r∗;
10:   for r \in R do
11:    if  Lᵣ = Lᵐᵃˣ    = 0 and \existsajk \in I^{\prime}, r∗ ≻ₐ r then
12:        Skip r;cur                         jk
14:    Select most preferred task ajk from proposals;
15:    if  r can execute ajk then
16:        if  no suitable model deployed then
17:            Deploy the model with accuracy lᵐⁱⁿ;
18:        end if
19:        Schedule ajk to r and remove ajk from I^{\prime};
20:        Update Lᵣ and Lcur;
22:        Reject ajk    and all less preferred tasks in proposals;
23:        Rejected tasks remove r from their preference lists;

# 5.2 GPU-Accelerated Task Processing Algorithm

Our proposed GAP algorithm establishes a task-to-device selection strategy, determining which tasks should be scheduled to GPUs for execution, while further ensuring load balancing across the entire system. The detailed procedure of GAP is described in algorithm 2. Specifically, GAP works as follows.

Step 1. Identify the dominant task type and its maximum accuracy requirement for the current RSU equipped with a GPU (line 2).

# Algorithm 2: GAP: GPU-Accelerated Task Processing Algorithm

Require: Tasks scheduling and models deployment strategy

Ensure: Computing device selection strategy for all tasks

1. for r \in R and gᵣ = 1 do
2. Identify dominant task type t∗ᵣ and max accuracy a∗ᵣ;
3. Backup the states of all RSUs;
4. Migrate non-t∗ᵣ tasks to the RSU with the lowest load;
5. while Lₘₐₓ - Lᵣ \geq ϵ do
6. Migrate t∗ᵣ tasks with acc \leq a∗ᵣ to r;
9. Calculate LCPUᵣ and Lᴳᴾᵁᵣ;
10. if Lᴳᴾᵁᵣ &#x3C; LCPUᵣ then
11. Execute all tasks scheduled on r using GPU;
13. Rollback the initial states of all RSUs;

Step 2. Backup the state of all RSUs and migrate non-dominant tasks to the RSU with the lowest load, ensuring system load remains unchanged (line 3 to line 4).

Step 3. Traverse tasks on other RSUs. If a task’s accuracy requirement is lower than the maximum, schedule it to the RSU until its load approaches the maximum system load (line 5 to line 8).

Step 4. Calculate the load of the RSU with GPU and CPU execution. If GPU improves performance, use it for all tasks. Otherwise, Rollback to the initial state saved for all RSUs (line 9 to line 14).

Step 5. Repeat steps 1 to 4, until all GPU-equipped RSUs are processed.

# 6 Simulation Results

# 6.1 Simulation Setup

In the simulations, we simulate the process in which vehicles generate DNN inference tasks and offload them to RSUs for execution, using various DNN models and real computing devices. All algorithms are implemented in Python 3.10. For each simulation scenario, the results are averaged over 10 runs to ensure reliability.

1. DNN models: Vehicles randomly generate inference tasks, which are initially assigned to RSUs in a stochastic manner. The inference tasks include object detection, image classification and semantic segmentation, each of which is supported by three models with low, medium, and high accuracy levels to meet diverse inference demands. Specifically, YOLOv8s, YOLOv8m, YOLOv8l are used for object detection, SqueezeNet1-1, GoogleNet, EfficientNet-V2-S for image classification, and DeepLabV3Plus-EifficientNet-Lite0, DeepLabV3Plus-EifficientNet-Lite4, DeepLabV3Plus-RegNetY-064 for semantic segmentation.

where the models are listed in order of increasing accuracy. All inference tasks take a single image of size 224 \times 224 \times 3 pixels as input. Each inference task generated by a vehicle specifies an accuracy requirement, and only RSUs that deploy models meeting this requirement can execute the corresponding task.

1. Computing units: We use four types of computing units to simulate the heterogeneity of computing resources in RSUs: Intel(R) Core i5-9400f and i7-9700 CPUs, as well as NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1650 and GeForce RTX 4060 GPUs. Specifically, each RSU is randomly equipped with a CPU, and only a subset of RSUs are randomly equipped with a GPU to provide inference service.
2. Other parameters: The number of RSUs varies within [5, 9], and the default value is 5. The number of RSUs equipped with GPUs within [1, 5], and the default value is 3. The number of tasks varies within [30, 50], and the default value is 40. The number of DNN models which are pre-deployed on RSUs varies within [3, 7], and the default value is 3. The maximum tolerable delay for all tasks is 4s. However, to verify the difference in the number of tasks completed by different algorithms as the maximum tolerable delay decreases, we also conducted experiments with the parameter range set to [0.5, 2.5]s. The storage capacity of each RSU is 300MB, the transmission rate between RSUs is 120Mbs, and the transmission rate between RSUs and the cloud is 960Mbs.
3. Baseline Algorithms: The proposed algorithm LAMA-GAP is evaluated by comparing with the following benchmarks.

- Baseline algorithm BA-MA: Inspired by [27, 28], we customize a baseline algorithm based on matching algorithm, i.e., algorithm BA-MA. In BA-MA, tasks prefer RSUs with lower loads, while RSUs prefer tasks they can fulfill. CPU is prioritized for task execution, as GPU is only effective when processing a sufficient number of the same task type.
- Baseline algorithm BA-GR: Inspired by [4,29], we customize a baseline algorithm based on greedy strategy, i.e., algorithm BA-GR. BA-GR selects the RSU with the lowest load for each task, deploying or updating models as needed. Similar to BA-MA, CPU is prioritized for task execution.

# 6.2 Performance Comparison

In this section, we introduce and discuss the performance of the results obtained from simulations conducted. Fig. 2 shows the performance comparisons between the proposed algorithm LAMA-GAP and baseline algorithms BA-MA and BA-GR, in terms of the maximum load of RSUs, for different numbers of tasks. From Fig. 2, the proposed LAMA-GAP outperforms the baselines BA-MA and BA-GR in terms of the maximum load of RSUs for all cases. For example, for the case where the number of tasks is 50, the maximum load of RSUs for our LAMA-GAP is 39.3% and 35.7% lower than BA-MA and BA-GR, respectively.

Fig. 3 shows the performance comparisons between the proposed algorithm LAMA-GAP and baseline algorithm BA-MA and BA-GR, in terms of the maximum load of RSUs, for different numbers of RSUs. As shown in Fig. 3, the

|     | BA-MA | BA-GR |
| --- | ----- | ----- |
| 1.5 |       |       |
| 2.0 |       |       |
| 2.5 |       |       |
| 3.0 |       |       |
| 3.5 |       |       |

Fig. 2. Performance comparisons among algorithms for different number of tasks

|   | BA-MA | BA-GR |
| - | ----- | ----- |
| 5 |       |       |
| 6 |       |       |
| 7 |       |       |
| 8 |       |       |
| 9 |       |       |

Fig. 3. Performance comparisons among algorithms for different number of RSUs

The proposed LAMA-GAP outperforms the two baseline algorithms for all cases. For example, for the number of RSUs is 9, the maximum load of RSUs for LAMA-GAP is 1.6226, for BA-MA is 2.4225, for BA-GR is 2.3111. In other words, the maximum load of RSUs for LAMA-GAP is lower by 33.1% and 29.8%, compared with that for BA-MA and BA-GR. Besides, the performance of all algorithms improves as the number of RSUs increases. This is because a higher number of RSUs provides more available resources, allowing tasks to have more RSU options, which in turn reduces the maximum load of RSUs.

Fig. 4 shows the performance comparisons between the proposed algorithm LAMA-GAP and baseline algorithm BA-MA and BA-GR, in terms of the maximum load of RSUs, for different numbers of RSUs with GPUs. As shown in Fig. 4, LAMA-GAP outperforms BA-MA and BA-GR for all cases in terms of the maximum load of RSUs. For example, for the case of the number of RSUs with GPU is 5, our LAMA-GAP reduces the maximum load of RSUs by 44.5% and 42.9% compared to BA-MA and BA-GR, respectively. In addition, the performance of the two baseline algorithms does not show a significant reg-

Maximum load of RSUs

|     | BA-MA | BA-GR | LAMA-GAP |   |   |
| --- | ----- | ----- | -------- | - | - |
| 3.5 |       |       |          |   |   |
| 3.0 |       |       |          |   |   |
| 2.5 |       |       |          |   |   |
| 2.0 |       |       |          |   |   |
| 1.5 | 1     | 2     | 3        | 4 | 5 |

The number of RSUs with GPU

Fig. 4. Performance comparisons among algorithms for different number of RSUs with GPUs

|     | BA-MA | BA-GR | LAMA-GAP |   |    |
| --- | ----- | ----- | -------- | - | -- |
| 3.5 |       |       |          |   |    |
| 3.0 |       |       |          |   |    |
| 2.5 |       |       |          |   |    |
| 2.0 |       |       |          |   |    |
| 1.5 | 3     | 5     | 7        | 9 | 11 |

The number of pre-deployed DNN models at the RSUs

Fig. 5. Performance comparisons among algorithms for different number of pre-deployed DNN models at the RSUs

ular trend as the number of RSUs equipped with GPUs varies, because neither algorithm takes into account the processing of tasks with GPUs. However, the overall trend of the proposed LAMA-GAP gradually decreases, except for the last data point, where no decline is observed. This may be because, when all RSUs are equipped with GPUs, frequent task migration between RSUs leads to performance degradation. Compared to the baseline algorithms, our proposed approach demonstrates a superior ability to efficiently utilize GPU resources.

Fig. 5 shows the performance comparisons between the proposed algorithm LAMA-GAP and baseline algorithms BA-MA and BA-GR, in terms of the maximum load of RSUs, for different numbers of pre-deployed DNN models at the RSUs. From Fig. 5, our proposed LAMA-GAP always performs better than algorithms BA-MA and BA-GR. For example, for the case where the number of pre-deployed DNN models is 3, the proposed LAMA-GAP can achieve an improvement of 39.4% and 33.7% compared with baseline BA-MA and BA-GR, respectively. Moreover, as the number of pre-deployed DNN models on the RSUs

Maximum load of RSUs Maximum load of RSUs

# Table 1. Performance comparisons among algorithms for different maximum tolerant delay of tasks (Metric: Number of uncompleted tasks)

| Maximum tolerant delay | BA-GR | BA-MA | LAMA-GAP |
| ---------------------- | ----- | ----- | -------- |
| 2s                     | 8.4   | 20.6  | 3.1      |
| 2.5s                   | 2.4   | 13.8  | 0.2      |
| 3s                     | 0.1   | 5.3   | 0        |
| 3.5s                   | 0     | 0.5   | 0        |
| 4s                     | 0     | 0     | 0        |

As the maximum tolerable delay decreases, tasks waiting in the queue for earlier tasks to complete may exceed this limit, leading to task failures (i.e., tasks uncompleted). We gradually reduce the maximum tolerable delay for tasks and compare the number of tasks completed by different algorithms under these conditions. From Table 1, the number of completed tasks for LAMA-GAP is lower than that for BA-MA and BA-GR for all cases. For example, for the case where the maximum tolerant delay is 2, the proposed LAMA-GAP reduces the number of unfinished tasks by 84.9% and 63.1% compared to BA-MA and BA-GR, respectively. This demonstrates the superiority of our algorithm in task scheduling, where rational scheduling mechanisms not only increase task completion quantity but also effectively maintain system load balancing.

We have formulated an optimization problem for jointly model deployment and task offloading for DNN inference to achieve load balancing in VEC. The objective is to minimize the maximum load among RSUs in VEC, under constraints of maximum tolerant delay for each inference task, requirements of inference accuracy for each inference task, etc. To solve the formulated problem, we have proposed a two-stage matching algorithm, denoted as LAMA-GAP. Specifically, for the first stage, we have designed a load-aware matching algorithm, denoted as LAMA, to deploy DNN models and offload inference tasks among RSUs. For the second stage, we have developed a GPU-accelerated task processing algorithm, denoted as GAP, to offload inference tasks between CPU and GPU to further achieve load balancing in VEC. We have conducted simulations on the platform.

with three kinds of DNN inference tasks, three kinds of DNN models with different accuracy, and four kinds of computation units. Simulation results have shown that, the proposed LAMA-GAP outperforms two baseline algorithms BA-MA and BA-GR, in terms of the maximum load among RSUs in VEC.

# References

1. Xu, H., Guo, M., Nedjah, N., Zhang, J., Li, P.: Vehicle and pedestrian detection algorithm based on lightweight YOLOv3-promote and semi-precision acceleration. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23(10), 19760-19771 (2022)
2. Yang, J., Ni, Q., Luo, G., Cheng, Q., Oukhellou, L., Han, S.: A trustworthy internet of vehicles: The DAO to safe, secure, and collaborative autonomous driving. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles 8(12), 4678-4681 (2023)
3. Liu, K., Liu, C., Yan, G., Lee, V.C., Cao, J.: Accelerating DNN inference with reliability guarantee in vehicular edge computing. \frac{IEEE}{ACM} Transactions on Networking 31(6), 3238-3253 (2023)
4. Wu, Y., Wu, J., Chen, L., Liu, B., Yao, M., Lam, S.K.: Share-aware joint model deployment and task offloading for multi-task inference. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 25(6), 5674-5687 (2024)
5. Maleki, E.F., Ma, W., Mashayekhy, L., La Roche, H.J.: QoS-aware content delivery in 5G-enabled edge computing: Learning-based approaches. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 23(10), 9324-9336 (2024)
6. Chai, Y., Gao, K., Zhang, G., Lu, L., Li, Q., Zhang, Y.: Joint task offloading, resource allocation and model placement for AI as a service in 6G network. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing 17(6), 3830-3843 (2024)
7. Chen, X., Hu, S., Yu, C., Chen, Z., Min, G.: Real-time offloading for dependent and parallel tasks in cloud-edge environments using deep reinforcement learning. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 35(3), 391-404 (2024)
8. Zhang, Y., Zhou, Y., Zhang, S., Gui, G., Adebisi, B., Gacanin, H., et al.: An efficient caching and offloading resource allocation strategy in vehicular social networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 73(4), 5690-5703 (2023)
9. Fan, W., Zhang, Y., Zhou, G., Liu, Y.: Deep reinforcement learning-based task offloading for vehicular edge computing with flexible RSU-RSU cooperation. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 25(7), 7712-7725 (2024)
10. Sethi, V., Pal, S.: FedDOVe: A federated deep Q-learning-based offloading for vehicular fog computing. Future Generation Computer Systems 141, 96-105 (2023)
11. Liao, Z., Yuan, C., Zheng, B., Tang, X.: An adaptive deployment scheme of unmanned aerial vehicles in dynamic vehicle networking for complete offloading. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 11(13), 23509-23520 (2024)
12. Duan, S., Lyu, F., Wu, H., Chen, W., Lu, H., Dong, Z., Shen, X.: MOTO: Mobility-aware online task offloading with adaptive load balancing in small-cell MEC. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 23(1), 645-659 (2022)
13. Mirza, M.A., Junsheng, Y., Raza, S., Ahmed, M., Asif, M., Irshad, A., Kumar, N.: MCLA task offloading framework for 5G-NR-V2X-based heterogeneous VECNs. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 24(12), 14329-14346 (2023)
14. Sun, Z., Sun, G., Liu, Y., Wang, J., Cao, D.: Bargain-match: A game theoretical approach for resource allocation and task offloading in vehicular edge computing networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 23(2), 1655-1673 (2023)

# Load Balancing for DNN Inference in VEC

1. Huang, H., Zhan, W., Min, G., Duan, Z., Peng, K.: Mobility-aware computation offloading with load balancing in smart city networks using MEC federation. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 23(11), 10411-10428 (2024)
2. Xu, Y., Mohammed, T., Di Francesco, M., Fischione, C.: Distributed assignment with load balancing for DNN inference at the edge. IEEE Internet of Things Journal 10(2), 1053-1065 (2022)
3. Hou, X., Guan, Y., Han, T.: Dystri: A dynamic inference based distributed DNN service framework on edge. In: International Conference on Parallel Processing. pp. 625-634 (2023)
4. Sun, J., Wang, H., Nie, L., Feng, G., Zhang, Z., Liu, J.: A joint strategy for service deployment and task offloading in satellite-terrestrial IoT. Computer Networks 225, 109656 (2023)
5. Zhao, Y., Liu, C., Hu, X., He, J., Peng, M., Ng, D.W.K., Quek, T.Q.: Joint content caching, service placement and task offloading in UAV-enabled mobile edge computing networks. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 43(1), 51-63 (2024)
6. Xiao, F., Fan, W., Han, L., Qiu, T., Cheng, X.: Joint service deployment and task offloading for datacenters with edge heterogeneous servers. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing pp. 1-14 (2025)
7. Liao, Z., Hu, W., Huang, J., Wang, J.: Joint multi-user DNN partitioning and task offloading in mobile edge computing. Ad Hoc Networks 144, 103156 (2023)
8. Li, H., Li, X., Fan, Q., He, Q., Wang, X., Leung, V.C.: Distributed DNN inference with fine-grained model partitioning in mobile edge computing networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 23(10), 9060-9074 (2024)
9. Dai, P., Han, B., Li, K., Xu, X., Xing, H., Liu, K.: Joint optimization of device placement and model partitioning for cooperative DNN inference in heterogeneous edge computing. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 24(1), 210-226 (2025)
10. Wang, X., Gao, G., Wu, X., Lyu, Y., Wu, W.: Dynamic DNN model selection and inference off loading for video analytics with edge-cloud collaboration. In: International Workshop on Network and Operating System Support for Digital Audio and Video. pp. 64-70 (2022)
11. Zhao, K., Zhou, Z., Chen, X., Zhou, R., Zhang, X., Yu, S., Wu, D.: Edgeadaptor: Online configuration adaption, model selection and resource provisioning for edge DNN inference serving at scale. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 22(10), 5870-5886 (2023)
12. Xu, J., Yao, H., Zhang, R., Mai, T., Guizani, M.: Low latency and accuracy-guaranteed DNN inference for UAV-assisted IoT networks. IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking pp. 1-1 (2025)
13. Xu, J., Yao, Y., Xu, X., Feng, W., Li, P.: Joint optimization of task offloading and resource allocation of fog network by considering matching externalities and dynamics. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 24(4), 2534-2550 (2025)
14. Chi, J., Qiu, T., Xiao, F., Zhou, X.: ATOM: Adaptive task offloading with two-stage hybrid matching in MEC-enabled industrial IoT. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 23(5), 4861-4877 (2023)
15. Zhou, R., Huang, Y., Wang, Y., Jiao, L., Tan, H., Zhang, R., Wu, L.: User preference oriented service caching and task offloading for UAV-assisted MEC networks. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing pp. 1-12 (2025)

